Build Event-Driven Data Pipelines using AWS Controllers for Kubernetes (ACK) and Amazon EMR on EKS (#6)
aws-controllers-k8s/examples: usecases/event-driven-pipeline/README.md

ip-10-1-10-7.us-west-2.compute.internal     Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-10-73.us-west-2.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-11-96.us-west-2.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-12-197.us-west-2.compute.internal   Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
```

## Set up the event-driven pipeline
### Create an EMR virtual cluster
Let’s start by creating a [virtual cluster](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/emr/latest/EMR-on-EKS-DevelopmentGuide/virtual-cluster.html) in EMR and link it with a Kubernetes namespace in EKS. By doing that, the virtual cluster will use the linked namespace in EKS for hosting spark workloads.

Let's apply the manifest by using kubectl command below. Once done, you can go to *EMR console*, click *Virtual clusters* and you should see the cluster record as shown below.  
```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/emr-virtualcluster.yaml
```
![virtual cluster](img/vc-sfn.png)

### Create a S3 bucket and upload data
Next, let’s create a S3 bucket for storing spark pod templates and sample data. 
```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/s3.yaml
```

> *Note*: If you don’t see the bucket got created, you can check the log from ACK S3 controller pod for details. The error is mostly caused by the bucket with the same name has existed. You need to change the bucket name in s3.yaml as well as in eventbridge.yaml and sfn.yaml. You also need to update upload-inputdata.sh and upload-spark-scripts.sh with the new bucket name.

Reviewer: I would call this out before the `kubectl apply`, since we already know it's a requirement to change the bucket name. I think it would be wise if we set the bucket name to an environment variable that can be reused throughout these code blocks. That way we don't need to keep repeating ourselves about using the updated bucket name.

Reviewer 2: will move the note above but it is not easy to pass env variables to yaml without extra tool. https://hughesadam87.medium.com/dead-simple-include-env-variables-in-kubernetes-deployment-yaml-1c0e8f859fde

Run the command below to upload input data and pod templates. Once done, sparkjob-demo-bucket S3 bucket is created with two folders: input and scripts.
```bash
bash spark-scripts-data/upload-inputdata.sh
```

### Create a Step Functions state machine

You need to make the following changes in sfn.yaml before apply. 

* replace the value for roleARN with stepfunctions_role_arn 
* replace the value for ExecutionRoleArn with emr_on_eks_role_arn
* replace the value for VirtualClusterId with your virtual cluster id

> * optional: change sparkjob-demo-bucket with your bucket name 

Reviewer: I don't think this is optional? If the user doesn't have access to this bucket, then the process will fail?

> sfn.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your `sfn.yaml` should look like the following:
```

                "EntryPointArguments": [
                  "s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/input/",
                  "s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/output/"
                ],
                "SparkSubmitParameters": "--conf spark.executor.instances=10"
              }
            },
            "ConfigurationOverrides": {
              "ApplicationConfiguration": [
                {
                 "Classification": "spark-defaults",
                "Properties": {
                  "spark.driver.cores":"1",
                  "spark.executor.cores":"1",
                  "spark.driver.memory": "10g",
                  "spark.executor.memory": "10g",
                  "spark.kubernetes.driver.podTemplateFile":"s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/scripts/driver-pod-template.yaml",
                  "spark.kubernetes.executor.podTemplateFile":"s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/scripts/executor-pod-template.yaml",
                  "spark.local.dir" : "/data1,/data2"
                }
              }
              ]
            }...
```
You can get your virtual cluster id from EMR console or use the command below.
```bash
kubectl get virtualcluster -o jsonpath={.items..status.id}
# result:

> f0u3vt3y4q2r1ot11m7v809y6  # VirtualClusterId

Reviewer: nit: Put this is another code block, so people can copy/paste without picking it up

```
Then, apply the manifest to create the Step Functions state machine.
```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/sfn.yaml
```

### Create an EventBridge rule
The last step is to create an EventBridge rule which is used as an event broker to receive event notifications from S3. Whenever a new file, such as a new spark script, is created in the S3 bucket, the EventBridge rule will evaluate (filter) the event and invoke the Step Functions if it matches the specified rule pattern, triggering the configured spark job.

```bash
kubectl get StateMachine -o jsonpath={.items..status.ackResourceMetadata.arn}
# result
arn: arn:aws:states:us-west-2:xxxxxxxxxx:stateMachine:run-spark-job-ack # sfn_arn

> ```

Reviewer: nit: see above - new code block

# Build Event-Driven Data Pipelines using AWS Controllers for Kubernetes (ACK) and Amazon EMR on EKS

> In this example, we demonstrate to build an event-driven data pipeline using [AWS Controllers for Kubernetes (ACK)](https://aws-controllers-k8s.github.io/community/docs/community/overview/) and Amazon EMR on EKS. ACK is used to provision and configure serverless AWS resources: [Amazon EventBridge](https://aws.amazon.com/eventbridge/) and [AWS Step Functions](https://aws.amazon.com/step-functions/). Triggered by an Amazon EventBridge rule, AWS Step Functions orchestrates jobs running in Amazon EMR on EKS. By using ACK, you can use the Kubernetes API and configuration language to create and configure AWS resources the same way you create and configure a Kubernetes data processing jobs. The team can do the whole data operation without leaving the Kubernetes platform and only need to maintain the EKS cluster since all the other components are serverless.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we demonstrate how to build an event-driven data pipeline using [AWS Controllers for Kubernetes (ACK)](https://aws-controllers-k8s.github.io/community/docs/community/overview/) and Amazon EMR on EKS. ACK is used to provision and configure serverless AWS resources: [Amazon EventBridge](https://aws.amazon.com/eventbridge/) and [AWS Step Functions](https://aws.amazon.com/step-functions/). Triggered by an Amazon EventBridge rule, AWS Step Functions orchestrates jobs running in Amazon EMR on EKS. By using ACK, you can use the Kubernetes API and configuration language to create and configure AWS resources the same way you create and configure Kubernetes data processing jobs. The team can perform all data plane operation without leaving the Kubernetes platform and only needs to maintain the EKS cluster since all the other components are serverless.
```

> The example demonstrates to build an event-driven data pipeline using ACK and Amazon EMR on EKS. Triggered by an Amazon EventBridge rule, AWS Step Functions orchestrates jobs running in Amazon EMR on EKS. 

Reviewer 3: I recommend removing this line since the prior paragraph covers the same.

Reviewer 2: added more details

> We will demo how to build an event-driven data pipeline using ACK controllers for Amazon EMR on EKS, AWS Step Functions, Amazon EventBridge and Amazon S3. A EKS cluster with ACK controllers will be provisioned using terraform modules. The emr-data-team-a namespace is created and bound with the virtual cluster my-ack-vc in EMR. ACK controllers will create a S3 bucket, a EventBridge rule for pattern matching and target routing, and a Step Functions state machine as an EventBridge rule target based on Kubernetes resources defined in YAML manifests. Sample spark scripts and sample data are stored in the S3 bucket. The pipeline will be triggered when a new script is uploaded. An S3 upload notification is sent to EventBridge and, if it matches the specified rule pattern, triggering the Step Functions. The Step Functions will call the EMR virtual cluster to run the spark job and all the spark executors and driver are provisioned inside the emr-data-team-a namespace. The output is saved back to the S3 bucket and the developer can check the result from the EMR console. 

Reviewer: Please surround all variable names like `emr-data-team-a` with backticks, so they stand out more easily

> We will demo how to build an event-driven data pipeline using ACK controllers for Amazon EMR on EKS, AWS Step Functions, Amazon EventBridge and Amazon S3. A EKS cluster with ACK controllers will be provisioned using terraform modules. The `emr-data-team-a` namespace is created and bound with the virtual cluster `my-ack-vc` in EMR. ACK controllers will create a S3 bucket, a EventBridge rule for pattern matching and target routing, and a Step Functions state machine as an EventBridge rule target based on Kubernetes resources defined in YAML manifests. Sample spark scripts and sample data are stored in the S3 bucket. The pipeline will be triggered when a new script is uploaded. An S3 upload notification is sent to EventBridge and, if it matches the specified rule pattern, triggering the Step Functions. The Step Functions will call the EMR virtual cluster to run the spark job and all the spark executors and driver are provisioned inside the `emr-data-team-a` namespace. The output is saved back to the S3 bucket and the developer can check the result from the EMR console. 

Reviewer: Tiny tiny ask:
Change `a S3 bucket` to `an S3 bucket`

Reviewer 2: changed

> ## Prerequisites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

Ensure that you have the following tools installed locally:

1. [aws cli](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv2.html)
2. [kubectl](https://Kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)
3. [terraform](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/terraform/install-cli)

## Deploy

To provision this example:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/aws-controllers-k8s/examples.git
cd usecases/event-driven-pipeline

region=<your region> # set region variable for following commands
terraform init
terraform apply -var region=$region #defaults to us-west-2
```

Enter `yes` at command prompt to apply

The following components are provisioned in your environment:
- A sample VPC, 3 Private Subnets and 3 Public Subnets
- Internet gateway for Public Subnets and NAT Gateway for Private Subnets
- EKS Cluster Control plane with one managed node group
- EKS Managed Add-ons: VPC_CNI, CoreDNS, Kube_Proxy, EBS_CSI_Driver
- K8S cluster autoscaler and fluentbit agent

> - IAM execution roles for EMR on EKS, Step Functions and EventBridge 

Reviewer 3: Note that we have ACK controllers for EC2, IAM and EKS :) All of the above could be set up using ACK resources instead of Terraform...

Reviewer 2: yes, using ACK IAM module would be another option.

ip-10-1-10-64.us-west-2.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-10-65.us-west-2.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-10-7.us-west-2.compute.internal     Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-10-73.us-west-2.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-11-96.us-west-2.compute.internal    Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
ip-10-1-12-197.us-west-2.compute.internal   Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8
```

## Set up the event-driven pipeline
### Create an EMR virtual cluster
Let’s start by creating a [virtual cluster](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/emr/latest/EMR-on-EKS-DevelopmentGuide/virtual-cluster.html) in EMR and link it with a Kubernetes namespace in EKS. By doing that, the virtual cluster will use the linked namespace in EKS for hosting spark workloads.

Let's apply the manifest by using kubectl command below. Once done, you can go to *EMR console*, click *Virtual clusters* and you should see the cluster record as shown below.  
```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/emr-virtualcluster.yaml
```
![virtual cluster](img/vc-sfn.png)

> ### Create a S3 bucket and upload data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Create an S3 bucket and upload data
```

Reviewer: This was marked resolved, but it is not

> Next, let’s create a S3 bucket for storing spark pod templates and sample data. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, let’s create an S3 bucket for storing Spark pod templates and sample data. 
```

> ip-10-1-12-197.us-west-2.compute.internal   Ready    <none>   19h     v1.24.9-eks-49d8fe8

Reviewer: This is a lot of nodes? Is it worth scaling it down a little bit by default?

Reviewer 2: we have two node groups in the cluster and each has 3 nodes for HA. Spark node group only for spark workloads and Core node group for controllers and all the other stuff. cluster_autoscaler  is installed for scaling

> *Note*: Please change the bucket name in s3.yaml as well as in eventbridge.yaml and sfn.yaml. You also need to update upload-inputdata.sh and upload-spark-scripts.sh with the new bucket name. If you don’t see the bucket got created, you can check the log from ACK S3 controller pod for details. The error is mostly caused by the bucket with the same name has existed. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Note*: Please change the bucket name in `s3.yaml` as well as in `eventbridge.yaml` and `sfn.yaml`. You also need to update `upload-inputdata.sh` and `upload-spark-scripts.sh` with the new bucket name. If you don’t see the bucket got created, you can check the log from the ACK S3 controller pod for details. The error is mostly caused by a bucket with the same name already existing. 
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/s3.yaml
```

> Run the command below to upload input data and pod templates. Once done, sparkjob-demo-bucket S3 bucket is created with two folders: input and scripts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Run the command below to upload input data and pod templates. Once done, `sparkjob-demo-bucket` S3 bucket is created with two folders: input and scripts.
```

```bash
bash spark-scripts-data/upload-inputdata.sh
```

### Create a Step Functions state machine

> You need to make the following changes in sfn.yaml before apply. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make the following changes in `sfn.yaml` before calling `kubectl apply -f sfn.yaml`. 
```

> * replace the value for roleARN with stepfunctions_role_arn 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `roleARN` with the value of `stepfunctions_role_arn` 
```

> Next, let’s create a S3 bucket for storing Spark pod templates and sample data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, let’s create an S3 bucket for storing Spark pod templates and sample data.
```

> * replace the value for ExecutionRoleArn with emr_on_eks_role_arn

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `ExecutionRoleArn` with `emr_on_eks_role_arn`
```

> * replace the value for VirtualClusterId with your virtual cluster id

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `VirtualClusterId` with your `virtual cluster id`
```

> * change sparkjob-demo-bucket with your bucket name 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `sparkjob-demo-bucket` with the name of your S3 bucket 
```

> Run the command below to upload input data and pod templates. Once done, 'sparkjob-demo-bucket' S3 bucket is created with two folders: input and scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the command below to upload input data and pod templates. Once done, `sparkjob-demo-bucket` S3 bucket is created with two folders: input and scripts.
```

            "JobDriver": {
              "SparkSubmitJobDriver": {
                "EntryPoint": "s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/scripts/pyspark-taxi-trip.py",
                "EntryPointArguments": [
                  "s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/input/",
                  "s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/output/"
                ],
                "SparkSubmitParameters": "--conf spark.executor.instances=10"
              }
            },
            "ConfigurationOverrides": {
              "ApplicationConfiguration": [
                {
                 "Classification": "spark-defaults",
                "Properties": {
                  "spark.driver.cores":"1",
                  "spark.executor.cores":"1",
                  "spark.driver.memory": "10g",
                  "spark.executor.memory": "10g",
                  "spark.kubernetes.driver.podTemplateFile":"s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/scripts/driver-pod-template.yaml",
                  "spark.kubernetes.executor.podTemplateFile":"s3://sparkjob-demo-bucket/scripts/executor-pod-template.yaml",
                  "spark.local.dir" : "/data1,/data2"
                }
              }
              ]
            }...
```

> You can get your virtual cluster id from EMR console or use the command below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can get your virtual cluster ID from the EMR console or use the command below.
```

```bash
kubectl get virtualcluster -o jsonpath={.items..status.id}
```
```bash
# result:
f0u3vt3y4q2r1ot11m7v809y6  # VirtualClusterId
```

> Then, apply the manifest to create the Step Functions state machine.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Apply the `sfn.yaml` manifest to create the Step Functions state machine.
```

```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/sfn.yaml
```

### Create an EventBridge rule

> The last step is to create an EventBridge rule which is used as an event broker to receive event notifications from S3. Whenever a new file, such as a new spark script, is created in the S3 bucket, the EventBridge rule will evaluate (filter) the event and invoke the Step Functions if it matches the specified rule pattern, triggering the configured spark job.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The last step is to create an EventBridge rule which is used as an event broker to receive event notifications from S3. Whenever a new file, such as a new Spark script, is created in the S3 bucket, the EventBridge rule will evaluate (filter) the event and invoke the Step Functions if it matches the specified rule pattern, triggering the configured Spark job.
```

```bash
kubectl get StateMachine -o jsonpath={.items..status.ackResourceMetadata.arn}
```
```bash
# result
arn: arn:aws:states:us-west-2:xxxxxxxxxx:stateMachine:run-spark-job-ack # sfn_arn
```

> Then, update eventbridge.yaml with 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then, update `eventbridge.yaml`: 
```

> * replace the value for roleARN with eventbridge_role_arn

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `roleARN` with `eventbridge_role_arn`
```

> * replace with arn with your sfn_arn 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `targets.arn` with your `sfn_arn`
```

> * change sparkjob-demo-bucket with your bucket name 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* replace the value of `sparkjob-demo-bucket` with the name of your S3 bucket 
```

> eventbridge.yaml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`eventbridge.yaml`:
```

  eventPattern: | 
    {
      "source": ["aws.s3"],
      "detail-type": ["Object Created"],
      "detail": {
        "bucket": {
          "name": ["sparkjob-demo-bucket"]    
        },
        "object": {
          "key": [{
            "prefix": "scripts/"
          }]
        }
      }
    }
  targets:
    - arn: arn:aws:states:us-west-2:xxxxxxxxxx:stateMachine:run-spark-job-ack # replace with your sfn arn
      id: sfn-run-spark-job-target
      roleARN: arn:aws:iam::xxxxxxxxx:role/event-driven-pipeline-demo-eb-execution-role # replace your eventbridge_role_arn
      retryPolicy:
        maximumRetryAttempts: 0 # no retries
  tags:
    - key: owner
      value: eb-ack
```

By applying the EventBridge configuration file above, an EventBridge rule is created to monitor the folder scripts in S3 buckets sparkjob-demo-bucket. For demo simplicity, the dead-letter queue is not set and maximum retry attempts is set to 0. For production usage, please set them based on your requirements by following the [guidance](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eventbridge/latest/userguide/eb-rule-dlq.html). 
```bash
kubectl apply -f ack-yamls/eventbridge.yaml
```

## Test the data pipeline

> To test the data pipeline, we will trigger it by uploading a spark script to the S3 bucket scripts folder using the command below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To test the data pipeline, we will trigger it by uploading a Spark script to the S3 bucket scripts folder:
```

```bash
bash spark-scripts-data/upload-spark-scripts.sh
```

> The upload event triggers the EventBridge event and then calls the Step Functions state machine. As shown below, you can go to *Step Functions* console, click *State machines* and choose *run-spark-job-ack*. You will see a new execution is running. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The upload  triggers the EventBridge event which then calls the Step Functions state machine. As shown below, you can go to *Step Functions* console, click *State machines* and choose *run-spark-job-ack*. You will see a new execution is running. 
```

![sfn-results](img/sfn-results.png)

> For the spark job details, you can go to *EMR console,* choose *Virtual clusters* and then click *my-ack-vc*. You will get all the job running history for this virtual cluster. Click *Spark UI* button in any row, you will be redirected the spark history server for more spark driver and executor logs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the spark job details, you can go to *EMR console*, choose *Virtual clusters* and then click *my-ack-vc*. You will get all the job running history for this virtual cluster. Click *Spark UI* button in any row, you will be redirected the Spark history server for more Spark driver and executor logs.
```
